How Vulnerability Scanners Work
Vulnerability scanner
implementations vary,
but generally follow a standard workflow.
Most automated scanners will:
Detect if a target is up and running.
Conduct a full or partial port scan,
depending on the configuration.
Identify the operating system using
common fingerprinting techniques.
Attempt to identify running services with
common techniques such as banner grabbing,
service behavior identification,
or file discovery.
And, execute a signature-matching process
to discover vulnerabilities.
Notice that this process basically mirrors
what we do during a manual assessment.
As penetration testers,
we may mentally execute some
type of signature-matching process.
For example,
we may remember that a particular version
of an application we spot in the field
is vulnerable to a remote exploit.
An automated scanner, however,
performs this step with the assistance
of unique vulnerability signatures.
Most automated scanners inspect a wide
variety of target information
during the signature-matching process.
Nevertheless,
even a strong signature match does not
guarantee the presence of a vulnerability.
This means automated scanners can
generate quite a few false positives
and by contrast,
false negatives,
in which a vulnerability is overlooked
because of a signature mismatch.
However, by updating the signature
database before every engagement,
we ensure that our scanner has the best
chance of discovering
the latest vulnerabilities.
This signature-matching process
is quite efficient,
and is much faster than
a fully manual review,
making automated vulnerability scanners
an excellent choice as a first-pass
during an assessment and a perfect
companion to a manual review.
Although vulnerability scanners are
designed to be relatively easy to use,
there are still some additional
considerations to keep in mind.
Vulnerability scan results can vary based on the level of automation,
whether a scan is conducted on a LAN
or over the Internet,
and whether a scan is run with credentials or not.
Refer to your lab guide
for more information.